#summary Using OR-Tools With Pypi

= Getting OR-Tools from Pypi =

== Getting Python ==

On linux, python should be installed by default.

On Mac OS X, you need to install XCode Commande Line Tools (for Mountain Lion and up).

On Windows, you need to install python from http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.7/ . Please use the 32 bit or 64 bit version.

== Installing or-tools from the examples archive ==

ortools is available on pypi.
The best way to install it is to download the Google.OrTools.python.examples archive from [https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B2yUSpEp04BNdEU4QW5US1hvTzg&usp=sharing here] ([https://app.box.com/s/gmgtnfqgl8ibrz5d1cm0 mirror]).

Unpack it, go in the created directory and run:

Linux and Mac OS X:
if you have root privileges:
{{{
sudo python2.7 setup.py install
}}} 

or

{{{
python2.7 setup.py install --user
}}} 

Windows:
{{{
c:\python27\python setup.py install
}}}

This should download the _ortools_ package, as well as its dependencies (protobuf, google apputils).

== Alternate installation methods ==

You can install ortools differently, although this is not recommended.

=== Using easy_install ===

{{{
easy_install ortools
}}}

Note that pip is not supported.

=== Using .msi files on windows ===

Using .msi file will not pull dependencies.
You will need to install protobuf and google-apputils from pypi.

= Running one example =

Once it is installed, you should see the following directory structure:
{{{
ortools_examples\
  data\           <- Data directory
  examples\       <- All examples
  LICENSE-2.0.txt <- Apache 2.0 License file
  README.txt      <- README file
  setup.py        <- setup file
}}} 

you should be able to run any examples in the examples/ directory

{{{
python2.7 examples/golomb8.py
}}}

= Troubleshooting =

== ImportError: No module named _pywraplp ==

Most likely, you are using windows XP. Unfortunately, ortools needs visual studio 2012 or up, which is incompatible with Windows XP.

Another common error is to use pip, this tools pulls the wrong archive with most likely a wrong platform. So please use easy_install, or better the installation instructions using the example archive.